Welcome to Signals and Threads, in-depth
conversations about every layer of the
tech stack from Jane Street. I'm Ron
Minsky. All right, it is my pleasure to
introduce Will Wilson, who's the
co-founder and CEO of Antithesis,
someone who started out studying math
and then somehow found himself working
on distributed databases and now running
a startup that is trying to change how
we all do testing, hopefully for the
better. Uh, Gene is actually both a
customer of antithesis and an investor,
something I want to talk about a little
bit further in, but thanks for joining
me.
>> Yeah, hopefully for the better, but I
think it would be hard to make it a
whole lot worse.
>> Fair.
>> So, let's just talk a little bit about
kind of how you got here. You started
off studying mathematics. You've done a
bunch of other things. You're now doing
a lot of what what seems to me is really
hardcore systems work.
>> Um,
>> tell us a little more about that
journey.
>> Sure. So when I got to college, um it
was, you know, it was the time when
everybody was super super excited about
computer science. Like Facebook was new,
Google was new, everybody was going off
and joining those companies and, you
know, making a lot of money and and
doing really cool stuff. And you know, I
basically made a a very large mistake,
which was I got to college and I was
like, "Wow, that computer science stuff
seems really cool. Too bad it's over,
right? Too bad. Too too bad. Too bad all
the interesting problems have been
solved already. Like look, somebody's
already made Google. like what else
could there be to do? Um, so I basically
ran kind of in the opposite direction. I
knew a little bit about how to program.
I taught myself when I was a kid, but I,
you know, I basically avoided studying
computer science at all and ran into
like the most abstr forms of
mathematics, which just seemed, you
know, more intellectually interesting
and also like nobody was going to run
out of math anytime soon.
>> That's true. Although this whole thing
of like maybe AIS will run us out of
math, but that's like a
>> Yeah. Yeah. Well, if I were
>> if I were making that decision again
today, I might have I might have picked
something different that AI is not so
good at.
>> So, when you say like obstuse
mathematics, like what kind of stuff
were you interested in?
>> Um, I was, you know, I did a bunch of
different things. I liked a lot
something called representation theory,
which is something very useful in
mathematical physics. It's basically the
study of like homorphisms from general
abstract groups into vector spaces,
either finite or infinite dimensional.
Um, it's pretty neat. That was actually
a little bit too useful. that was a
little bit too applied. So I also, you
know, I also got into some like
mathematical
>> there like actual matrices there,
>> right? Well, there's actual matrices and
you can actually use this to like, you
know, do particle physics, which, you
know, I don't know. So I I I also did a
little bit of set theory. I got into
something called large cardinal theory,
which is so abstract it almost sounds
like a parody, right? It's basically
what you know what new forms of
mathematics can we develop if we add
assumptions that certain very large
infinite numbers exist and the Wikipedia
pages on this stuff are a total hoot if
you want to look at it.
>> I have I have sadly looked more than a
little bit at large cardinal theory and
it is fun and wild and indeed not the
most practical of all.
>> This is the only podcast I can imagine
where the host might say that as a
response.
>> All right. So, you had like a promising
start of a career in mathematics. Why
did that not go anywhere? Oh, well, you
know, I basically I got to my senior
year and I did actually apply to grad
school and I actually got into grad
school a few different places and I was
all set to go off and do my PhD in math
and then I just looked around and I
looked at my fellow classmates who were
going to grad school and I looked at my
professors and I looked at myself and I
had a very important moment of
self-realization which was that I am
never going to be a world-class
mathematician because basically I mean
basically for the same reason that I'm
never going to dunk, right? I'm never
going to be a world-class basketball
player. There's a certain measure of
natural talent and random variation that
is just required. And like, yes, you can
definitely get better at basketball or
better at math by working very very
hard, but these are both professions
with this like incredibly skewed return
distribution where if you're not in the
top 0.00001%
of people, you're just never actually
going to have a great time. And so, you
know, I I realized I realized that I
could spend six years in grad school or
longer and, you know, eventually get
some job, you know, teaching somewhere
as an adjunct or something and, you
know, or I could not do that and I could
sort of bail out of this process sooner
and I just I I realized that was what I
had to do.
>> Got it. And then you transitioned into
what what did you do from there? Well,
you know, I basically I actually
initially was off doing a little bit of
biomedical research. I had uh I had
interned when I was in college and and
actually before college at a small
biotech startup and I'd done a bit of
that and I'd sort of and then I after
that I bopped around in a few different
sort of deadendish jobs and it was at
one of those that I had this crucial
realization and the crucial realization
was that actually my ability to write a
janky Python script was unbelievably
economically valuable. Right? Like I was
sitting at my job and you know my boss
had assigned me some like enormous pile
of drudgery and you know I I looked at
it and I so I wrote a Python script and
it took me 45 minutes and it automated
the enormous pile of drudgery and I was
like okay here I'm done and he looked at
me with this like expression of dread
and was like that was supposed to be
your work for the next 3 months like and
that was that made me maybe something in
my head I was like ah interesting maybe
I should get better at this programming
thing that seems you know that seems
like it could be good. So, you know, I
went and I I I taught myself how to code
for real and I, you know, did some
online classes and then I eventually got
my way into a number of tech startups.
>> So, how do you actually learn how to
program? My overall sense of the world
is that the world is actually very bad
at teaching people how to program.
Universities, I feel like, are
especially bad at it. Uh, they do this
weird form of performance art where you
like professors hand out assignments and
then students fill in and resolve it and
then it's given back and looked at once
and then it vanishes like a puff of
smoke. It's like the eancence is part of
the art of it all. Um, and real software
is nothing like that, right? It's a
thing where you the the kind of
permanent evolving state of the software
is like part of what's important about
it. Part of what you need to like
optimize for when you're writing
software are these not like just the
functional properties of what the
software does, but the non-functional
properties around how extensible is it
and how easy will it be for be for
people in the future to understand and
what kind of performance problems are
you creating in the future and all these
things that like don't show up in the
kind of very smallcale fake environments
where you learn how to code and and you
need to do very different things to
learn to be good at it and and what do
you do?
>> Yeah. No, that is super super true. And
so I will I will I I did actually try to
solve that problem a little bit, but I
will also qualify my answer by saying
that my main goal was to get hired at a
software company, not to become a great
engineer yet. I think I knew somewhere
in the back of my head that becoming a
great engineer would require working
with other great engineers and you know
being mentored by them as indeed it did.
Um but basically what I did was was I I
I followed two tracks and I was on
paternity leave at the time which made
it easier because I could sort of do
this nights and weekends and like you
know basically I I studied a lot of
academic knowledge right all the stuff
that I had missed in college. I went and
learned about complexity theory and I
learned about the theory of algorithms
and I learned what a data structure is
and like all the stuff that everybody
else learns their sophomore year. Um, so
I sort of, you know, I jammed all that
into my head, you know, using a bunch of
YouTube videos and, you know, online
resources and and so on, which there's a
lot of these days. And then I also just
tried building things and I mostly
focused on things that were interesting
to me and things that were hard. And I
tried to pick a pretty broad set of
things that would force me to to learn
different skills. So, you know, I wrote
my own little ray tracer and it was like
a classic
>> pretty crappy ray tracer, but like I did
learn C++, you know, and I did learn a
lot about, you know, how to how to do
object-oriented programming and how to
do memory management and so on in the
course of that. Then I wrote a little
toy compiler, you know, and I, you know,
I wrote a little computer game and I
wrote, you know, I wrote like a bunch of
different I wrote a little graph
database. Um, you know, I did I did this
>> precient that was
>> Yeah, that's right. That's right. Turns
out turns out that those those well
those were actually a fad. They never
really took off.
>> Sure. Graph databases has not really
taken off but you know there's a lot of
database theory.
>> There's a lot of database theory. That's
right. Um and that actually is part of
what got me interested in databases and
what eventually led me to working at
Foundation DB which is where I did find
really great engineers who were able to
mentor me and and who made me actually
somewhat competent.
>> Got it. And then somehow from the work
at Foundation DB you ended up eventually
founding antithesis. Mhm.
>> So tell us about that.
>> Yeah, so Foundation DB was a magical
place. Um it was I mean I think in some
ways a little bit like Jane Street,
right? Like it's just one of these
places that you walk into and everybody
is brilliant and everybody is incredibly
humble and everybody is incredibly nice
and good at their jobs and it just hums
with this extraordinary energy. And one
of the brilliant things that had
happened at Foundation DB, it's a thing
that should happen in more software
projects, I think. You know, they sat
down and were like, we're going to build
a new kind of database. This is a kind
of database which at the time people
believed was literally physically
impossible to build because of a
misunderstanding of something called the
CAP theorem. And we we can get into that
more if you want. Um, but basically
basically they were like, okay, we're
going to try and build this new kind of
database. what do we need to have in
order to build this database? And they
realized that in order to build such a
system, you would be totally foolish to
do it without a powerful deterministic
simulation framework that could sort of
test the database in every possible
configuration, in every possible mode of
operation, you know, in all possible
network conditions and failure
conditions and so on, you know, with any
amount of concurrent user activity and
have that all be replayable
deterministically. And if you think
about for a second, it's like, yeah, you
would be foolish to build a database
without that. But, you know, they were
the only people I knew of who had
actually acted on that insight. And so,
they built this extraordinary system and
say like what is a deterministic
simulation framework,
>> right?
>> Right. There's like a few words there,
deterministic, simulation. I feel like
understanding how those play out is
maybe useful.
>> Right. Right. Right. Sure. So, um,
basically, let's let's start by talking
about property based testing in general
in the abstract. um like you know quick
check right from Haskell or I think
Okamel has its own property based
testing system right
>> every functional programming language
has at least three of them
>> right and then in Python you've got
hypothesis um so property based testing
the basic idea of it is I have some
piece of code rather than sit there and
write a bunch of unit tests that do like
particular things that I've thought of
ahead of time that take particular
actions I'm going to just tell my
testing framework what you can do to my
code like what actions you can take
right if it's like a little data
structure it's like maybe I can insert
an item and I can pop an item and I can
query for some item or something and
then you set up a bunch of randomized
generators which do all these things in
random orders and then you figure out
what the invariance of your program are
right like probably an easy one is it
shouldn't crash but like maybe a more
interesting one for a data structure is
like if I insert five things then
there's there's five things in it. But
actually, that's not a great one, right?
There's a higher order one, which is if
I insert n things and don't remove
anything, there's n things there. But
then we can make that even more abstract
and be like, if I insert n things and
then remove m things, so long as n is
bigger than m, you know, I'll have n
minus m things in there, right? And so
you can you can sort of get quite clever
with these things. And then the magic is
you now have not a test. You have a
thing that will produce an infinite
number of tests like so long as you keep
running it and it will basically try
your thing in many many more
permutations and combinations than you
would ever have thought of. That's the
basic idea of property based testing.
Right.
>> That's right. And these like classic
frameworks like quickjack in some sense
automate the the hardest part of this is
generating a good probability
distribution. And you were framing this
in terms of operations where you have
like sequences of operations on some
kind of system and that's already like
leaning a little more systemsy. I feel
like the classic functional programming
version is more like I'm going to test
my map data structure or whatever. And
then often like what you're putting in
is just you know like lists and whatever
shapes of containers or whatever that
you want to use for doing
straightforward things. And often you're
thinking about it less in terms of
sequences of operations and just like
some fairly broad shape of data that you
might want to put in. and you want nice
ways of generating good probability
distributions. The question of what
counts as a good probability
distribution is actually quite a
complicated one.
>> It is very complicated.
>> And so in some sense there's like two
things you need to specify. There's like
the properties are supposed to be true
and the probability distributions for
generating examples. And that's kind of
the whole bulk,
>> right? And so then one of the rules of
all human endeavors is that every good
idea is like rediscovered 17 different
times by different people who are in
slightly different subdomains and so
they didn't talk to each other and then
they create their own language and set
of concepts for it and it's all very
confusing
>> and this is also true of property based
testing which has been reinvented tons
of times and one of the most common
other you know one of the most
well-known other times it was invented
it was called fuzzing which is a very
very similar thing conceptually right
fuzzing is like more from the security
world. But if you squint, it's the same
thing. Like I have a property which is
my program shouldn't crash, shouldn't
have memory corruption, shouldn't have
security vulnerabilities. And then I'm
going to feed in a distribution and the
distribution happens to like look like
stuff to parse maybe that has errors in
it or has maliciously crafted content.
And I'm going to have a random generator
which is my fuzzer which is going to
like keep sending in stuff until I find
a failure of the property that I care
about. And this is like a totally
separate group of people who like solved
many very similar problems in some
different ways and in some similar ways.
And like the two sides just never talk.
>> That's right. And like the early
versions of fuzzing were like very
simple on the probability distribution
side. It's just like you know white
noise basically for throwing into things
for some of the very early research and
just like take the Unix utilities and
throw white noise at them and see what
happens. Y
>> uh and the language of properties was
incredibly impoverished. It was like not
much better than doesn't crash.
>> Yep. But the fuzzing people had a clever
trick which the property based testing
people did not have. The fuzzing people
realized that you don't need to make
this a blackbox process. You can
actually track things like code coverage
and you can see what your inputs make
your code do and then you can use like a
genetic algorithm or an evolutionary
algorithm to adapt your input
distribution as you go to find more and
more interesting behaviors.
>> That's right. You basically like have
these tentacles into the program and you
feel out where you are in the state
space and try and explore more of the
state space of which branches you've
gone through and all that.
>> Right. It's definitely like an extra
idea and and like you know a bunch of
the property based stuff came out of the
functional programming world which has
this oh we're going to derive prob
probability distributions from types
totally makes sense from that and this
like no no we're going to modify the
compiler and we're going to like do a
bunch of weird ad hoc stuff to like try
and exploit the state space it's a very
different but very good idea
>> yeah well the interesting thing is like
you are actually I mean you are trying
to solve the turn halting problem here
right we know you cannot do it we know
that there is no one technique that's
going to find all the bugs And so I
actually believe that the correct
response to that is just to like throw
everything at the wall and see what
sticks. like you should try and have
very clever probability distributions
and you should try to have you know
evolutionary algorithms and you should
have you know constraints and you know
constraint solvers and like I mean you
like do everything you can add some ML
like whatever like this is we're up
against a very hard problem and the nice
thing about a basket of tools is that if
you're careful about how you architect
them
no tool can like make the situation that
much worse But there are certain
situations where it can make it much
better. And so by having a broad
distribution of techniques, you're
likely to have something that works on a
larger space of programs.
>> Right. Particularly because we're doing
testing, right? It's just like you do an
extra thing. It takes some time. That's
right.
>> But it doesn't break anything. It's just
like if if it was the worst thing it can
do is not find any bugs for you.
>> That's right. And you have to be a
little bit more careful about that once
you have like sophisticated evolutionary
tactics, right? Because it could be that
some technique you use like pollutes
your distribution in some way that makes
it harder to find other bugs. But you
know that just means you don't have to
be you have to be not be totally naive.
>> Got it.
>> Yeah. So okay. So there's all these
people doing randomized testing. And
what's interesting
is nobody
until very recently had ever applied any
technique like this to what I would call
real software. And this is like not a
knock on hasll or you know or or or
small functional data structures.
Certainly not a knock on parsers written
in C and C++. What I mean by that is
like nobody fuzzed or used property
based testing on a database or on a
computer game or on a large distributed
system or on an operating system or a
kernel like people people have lately
started to do these things but by and
large it was not happening until quite
recently. I feel like it wasn't common,
but is it really that it wasn't done at
all? Like I' I've talked to like John
Hughes about stuff that the quick check
folk did where they like, you know,
worked with like auto manufacturers for
fuzzing their like, you know, super
weird network inside of the computer
>> and things like that. So, I feel like
there is stuff that like I think should
qualify as real software that's more
than like the traditional like toys to
which the stuff is applied. There's at
least been some commercial applications.
>> I think I think people did some of it,
but I would say it was vanishingly rare.
Um, I mean, all of these techniques
maybe arguably are like vanishingly
rare. Like to a first order
approximation, like 0% of people use
them,
>> but but but I think it was especially
uncommon to try and use it on big stuff.
>> Yeah. I mean, I think it's felt
relatively niche. I think that's I think
there are things that qualify as more
serious applications of it, but like
much rarer than they deserve to be
applied or something.
>> And and basically, I think that this is
actually for somewhat good reason. Um,
so when it when you have big software,
big complicated software, you sort of
have and I I I promise I'm getting back
to your original question, which is what
is deterministic simulation testing? Um,
basically when you have big complicated
software, there's two things that get
dramatically harder.
The first thing is the state space of
the software that you are trying to
explore is really complicated. And it is
probably complicated in such a way that
the fuzzing trick of just you know
recording code coverage is no longer a
very good map for where you have gotten
in the software. Right? Consider
something like a Python interpreter. If
you hit 100% code coverage in that you
have not gotten anywhere close to
exhausting its behavior. or consider
something like
>> and that's and that one is just because
like the state space is much bigger than
just like where you are in each branch
of the code like your code location
doesn't tell you that much about the
state space there's like lots of other
things going on that
>> what's what's in various variables like
what's in memory like all this other
stuff and if you try and like take the
cartisian product of that with all the
coverage you're just it's like way too
big and you're not going to make any
progress um you know or consider a
distributed system right where just what
coverage you have gotten might be less
important than like what order you have
encountered coverage across different
nodes in some distributed algorithm. Um,
and so basically
knowing where you are and fully
exploring the program becomes harder
both from the fuzzing philosophy of
we're going to use signals like coverage
to determine where we are and it also
gets harder from the like PBT philosophy
of we're going to have really clever
intelligent random distributions because
basically you have to just get lucky so
many times in a row to get something
useful happening that you're you you
just kind of it's intractable to solve
the problem purely that way.
>> Right. You more or less probably can't
do it fully obliviously. Right. That's
right. The oblivious thing where you
have the distribution chosen ahead of
time and you're just throwing things at
the system like you kind of have to be
responsive to the state of the system if
you're going to get the right kind of
coverage. Although it's worth saying
like when you say covering the like you
never actually cover the state space,
right? The thing that you're doing is
always weirder and more huristic because
the actual state space is like highly
exponential. Yes. And so you will not in
any reasonable testing budget be able to
test any appreciable fraction of it. So
there's some weird question of like
taste of like which vanishingly small
subset of the scenarios is it important
for you to cover.
>> Yes, totally true. And and we will come
back to that. That is like there's that
that's like right you want to cover all
of the interesting parts of the state
space and you want to try and do it as
quickly as you can and and that is a
whole another dimension along which this
is hard. Um, okay. So, then there's a
second problem with these larger
systems, more quote unquote real
systems, which is that they don't really
look they don't really look like the
kinds of systems that people have
traditionally applied fuzzing and
property based testing to in in two kind
of ways. One is that they tend to be
interactive, right? They tend to not be
things that accept an input and then do
a bunch of computation and then crash or
don't, right? which is kind of what
fuzzing is optimized for, right? They
tend to be things that take a little bit
of input and then send you a response,
then get a little more input and then do
something. Like imagine a web server or
a computer game. It's like got this
interactive flow to it. Um, which makes
the whole fuzzing model of like I'm
going to come up with what is a good
input to break the system and send it in
and see what happens a little bit more
complicated. Then the second thing which
which makes the state space exploration
problem even harder is that these
systems are all non-deterministic. And
this is like this is in some ways I
think the crux of it because basically
computers are machines right they're
like real physical machines in the real
world and in order to make those
machines really efficient you know CPU
designers have done all kinds of evil
and awful things to make them that that
have this side effect of making them
non-deterministic meaning that if you
try and perform the same computation on
the same computer twice with all the
same inputs. Once you have things like
threads involved, once you have things
like timers, once you have things that
need to interact in any way with the
real world, with network sockets, with
hard drives, suddenly your computer
program is not a pure function, right?
Unless you have written it in Haskell
and have been very very careful. Um it's
it's g it's a big complicated weird
state machine with all kinds of
co-effects from the environment that can
mean mean it does something totally
different each time you run it.
>> Yep.
>> Okay.
>> Although although one of the weird
paradoxes of this is it is often the
case that the individual components are
actually all very close to
deterministic. It's just that they
wildly depend on initial conditions
>> and their behavior is kind of chaotic
and diverges from predictable things. So
it's like you know the you know actually
the thread scheduler is a completely
deterministic program in some sense
right except and timers the timers like
work largely deterministically but like
your memory you know it doesn't always
have the same latency there's like a
cycle where the memory gets refreshed
and it'll block out for a very little
piece of time and you know did you start
your program at exactly the same time in
the memory refresh cycle the two times
that you ran it like probably not and
then like all of these things compound
and multiply as you have multiple
systems talking to each other the small
differences become big differences and
effectively this nondeterminism kind of
gets like pulled almost out of nothing.
>> Yeah, that that is a fantastically
accurate intuition and we have actually
we haven't started talking about our
technology yet but like we have actually
we we were able to measure that
intuition like we can empirically tell
you what the leaponov exponent of your
software is and like what its chaotic
doubling time is. And it turns out that
for Linux it's insanely fast. Like
basically if you change one bit in the
memory of a Linux computer, the whole
state of the system is completely
different like within tens of
microsconds. It's it's actually crazy.
>> That's shocking.
>> Yeah, it's it's nuts. It I I did not
believe it. Um but it's true.
>> Yeah, I'm still not sure I do, but
>> I I can I can I can show you I can show
you. Um okay, anyway. So So why is this
nondetermism so bad? So it's bad for two
reasons. The more obvious reason is it
means that if my I yeah you I do my cool
fuzzing property based testing thing I
run some fantastically expensive
computational search I find the bug
that's going to ruin my life and then
you know if I don't have exactly the
right logging in place if I can't just
look at the source code and oneshot the
bug I may never make it happen again and
that is very very frustrating now my
testing system has just made me feel bad
right
it's that's not that's
>> something is wrong
>> that's right Good luck.
>> You'll never know what it is until you
find out at 3:00 a.m. when your pager
goes off. Um, so that sucks. Then
there's a second problem with it, which
is that it makes the fuzzing trick of
look at what inputs have made me do
useful things so far and then try small
modifications on those inputs break down
and become much less performant. Because
if putting the same input into the
system again might not get me to the
same point in the state space, then
putting a slightly tweaked one is extra
maybe not going to get me to the same
point in the state space. And so this
like optimization loop that all of
fuzzing kind of implicitly depends on
doesn't work very well. You basically
need the fact that there's like a kind
of random input like more or less your
random number generator and like a
function from that into the behavior and
you really want that function to be a
real function. That's right. Which you
can always run and get the same answer
so that you can actually explore that
space. Whereas if like every time you
try it there's just like a new version
of the function that like is spiritually
similar but like has all the all
different behavior.
>> It makes fuzz degrade into random
guessing. That's right. That's okay. So
that brings me back to what is
deterministic simulation testing. And
the idea here is the somewhat crazy one
of like we can sidestep all these issues
if we just make all of the software
deterministic which sounds a little bit
insane and maybe like a little bit
useless like it's it's like you know
assume you had a can opener. How do you
make your software deterministic? And
that's a very fair criticism up until
the existence of antithesis which I will
get to later has kind of solved this
problem for people. But in the absence
of that, what we did at Foundation DB
was we wrote our software in such a way
that it could be run completely
deterministically. So we could simulate
an entire interacting network of
database processes within one physical
Linux process with deterministic task
scheduling and execution with fake
concurrency with mocked implementations
of communication with networks and with
disks. Right? we could cause database
processes to have simulated failures and
restart. We had to do all this with no
dependencies whatsoever, right? Because
as soon as you add a dependency on
Zookeeper or, you know, Kafka or some
some other program like you lose this
ability to run in this totally
deterministic mode. But it made us so
much more productive to be able to test
our software this way that it was worth
it to us to not have any dependencies.
>> So is it fair to say that the key
enabling technology here is dependency
injection? Like you have a bunch of APIs
that let you interact with the world.
Like most of what you write in a usual
program are in fact deterministic
components. Like you know you do some
computation, the result is
deterministic. But there are some things
that you do that aren't. Like you ask
what time it is. Mhm.
>> It's like, well, now you're really two
different pieces of hardware, right?
There's like a clock and a CPU and
they're interacting and like, who knows
what's going to happen when you ask what
time it is. You send or receive a
network packet. You ask for something
from disk. So, the thing you can do is
you can just like enumerate all of the
APIs that you have that introduce
non-determinism and just have them have
two modes. There's like the regular
production mode where it hits the real
world and is non-deterministic. And then
there's test mode where you just have
control and you can behind all of those
calls you can have a simulation that
does that gives sort of the response to
the API where you have control over it
and you can thereby force it to be
deterministic. Is that like the basic
trick
>> right? Well that's the basic trick but
it you you're left with one really
really really big problem which is
concurrency. Like if your if your
program you know even if your program
only runs on one computer you probably
have threads and then the OS is going to
schedule them in like god knows what
order and you know they also by the way
will take non-deterministic amounts of
time to execute actions you know thank
you Intel um you know and thank you
everything else running on your computer
right
>> well I mean thank you Intel because if
they didn't do that things would be way
slower
>> super true um so so that's you know that
that you know people can people can
solve that right like there are
languages is with sort of cooperative
multitasking
um models of concurrent programming uh
which you know which which you can
actually plug in a deterministiculer and
and make that all work.
>> But then if you have multiple processes
running on different computers now
you're really in trouble. Right now you
know how long did it take that network
packet to get from this computer to that
other one is something that's completely
outside of your control. And if you want
to try and run them all on the same
computer, you need to create some way of
faking
processes on different computers running
on the same computer in some sort of
cooperative multitasking runtime so that
you can make it all deterministic. And
there are people who have done that. You
know, we did it at Foundation DB. I
think you guys did it at Jane Street.
>> That's right. Yeah. One of the reasons I
sort of know the the bag of tricks is
that this is more or less exactly what
we have done and hit the exact kind of
same set of issues and uh the same basic
uh commitment to like we will write all
the code ourselves. We had kind of
weirdly fallen into by using an obscure
programming language. to like you know
we had this whole whole O camel
ecosystem where we had really deep
control over the whole thing and so yeah
a lot of our systems not all of our
systems but a bunch of our systems are
built in this way where we have this
kind of endto-end control and can do
this kind of deterministic simulation
and it's absolutely critical for all the
reasons you said it really helps you go
faster in many different ways
>> yeah like I I think I something I
haven't said yet is this all sounds like
a lot of work and it is a lot of work
but it was so gamechanging at foundation
DB like that company could not have
existed without this technology. We
built a thing that everybody thought was
impossible with a team of like 10 people
and we did it really really fast and we
did crazy things that nobody would ever
dare to do without a testing system like
this. I mean I'll give you two examples.
Um one was we deleted all of our
dependencies, right? And in particular,
we deleted Apache Zookeeper, which we
had been using as our implementation of
consensus, like of Paxos. And like
nobody writes their own Paxos
implementation. That's like a that's
like a thing that insane people do who
want to like have bugs. And we did it.
And our new one was less buggy than the
one the officially good one from
Zookeeper that everybody uses. Um, you
know, later we basically deleted and
completely rewrote from scratch our like
core database concurrency control and
conflict checking algorithm to make it
more parallelizable and more scalable
and faster which again is just like a
totally crazy thing to do. Like I don't
know of other databases that once they
have gotten that piece working have
rewritten it, let alone like rewritten
it to make it more theoretically
scalable and like cleaner, you know,
that's just like nuts. But if you have a
system that can find all the bugs really
really fast, it frees you to just do
crazy stuff like that.
>> Okay, so this is seems like a great
idea. We think it's a great idea, which
is why we've done it. Foundation DB
thought it was a great idea. It's also
like totally impractical. totally
impractical because like the whole thing
of like we'll just do everything from
scratch. It's like okay yeah maybe a
database system should do that and like
maybe some like crazy trading company
that made a decision 20 years ago to
like use a weird tech stack can do that
for all sorts of weird reasons but like
it's not like a generalizable tool,
>> right?
>> And Antithesis is trying to be a company
that sells a generalizable tool. So like
what how do you go from the good idea
that's totally impractical to like a
thing people can use,
>> right? So basically we've talked about
how there's sort of two key obstacles to
making a really really powerful
randomized testing system you know what
we call an autonomous testing system
that can find all your bugs really
really fast. One is need to, you know,
actually explore the state space
extremely quickly and find all the bugs.
And the other is this determinism issue
which both impacts the usefulness of
finding those bugs and also makes it
just harder to explore the state space.
And basically what we're trying to do is
the absolutely insane hubristic goal of
solving both those problems in full
generality for every piece of software
in existence. And so the so the
basically the the important thing is we
solve them in the reverse order.
>> Um so once you solve determinism that
actually gives you a huge leg up in
efficient state space exploration for
all the reasons we've already talked
about and I can go into more detail
about how we use that.
>> Um okay so how do we solve determinism?
That sounds kind of hard because as
we've just talked about all kinds of
things that you want to do on a computer
are nondeterministic. So there's other
people who have tried to do this. Um,
you know, there's people who use
frameworks, right? Like the one that you
guys have at Jane Street or like the one
that we built a Foundation DV. There's
since been a bunch of open source ones
built for various programming languages
and runtimes. Um, that's cool. It only
helps people who are committed to using
that framework, willing to write all of
their software with that framework, not
use any dependency. It's not in that
framework. It's not general, right? Yep.
not a general solution. Can't do it that
way. There are people who have tried to
solve this problem with record and
replay where basically like as I'm
running my program, I write down the
result of every single system call in
the exact moment at which it was
delivered. And then if I want to run my
program again, I can just replay all of
that without actually talking to the
system. And that works pretty well for a
thing running on a single node. Doesn't
work very well for distributed systems.
It's also just not very scalable. It's
>> although there's a critical idea that
you snuck in there which is where you
said the word sis call, right? So the
whole like the kind of foundation
dbjain/ whatever version of doing this
at the library level is like there are
particular function calls inside of a
language that you're going to make
swappable. But here what you're doing is
say you know what actually we're going
to do this at the OS level. Yes. Right.
at the bottom actually all the
non-determinism generally comes in from
the operating system and from
concurrency and concurrency is somewhat
mediated by the operating system. So the
SIS but system calls are anyway one huge
source of non-determinism. And so the
idea of these kind of you know record
replay things are we're just going to do
the dependency injection at that level.
And we've already now stepped up a big
level in generality. Right. I no longer
have to own your programming language.
>> Right. Right.
>> It's gotten better.
>> It's a big step.
>> We're not there yet though.
>> Okay.
>> So we're not we're not there yet for two
reasons. One is it's still not fully
general. Right. This is only going to
work for the operating systems that
you've designed this to support. And
maybe that's okay. Maybe you think it's
fine because everybody uses Linux, but
like
>> weirdly, you know, seem to be true now.
>> People people run IO write iOS apps,
man. Like people, you know, people
people write computer games that mostly
run on Windows. There's there's others
out there.
>> Um, but I think, you know, also also
doesn't work great for distributed
systems, although you can kind of hack
it and there's a few people who have.
>> Um,
>> actually, why doesn't it work great for
distributed systems? The sys call layer
gets, you know, it gets you a hook into
all the distributed like all the
distributed communication comes again
through the OS. Yeah.
>> So why why can't this generalize to
that?
>> Ba basically all of the record replay
systems out there are designed to do
this for one process.
>> Got it. So it's not so much a
fundamental question as an engineering
question.
>> Correct. Correct. It's just like the the
UX is not very good.
>> Sure.
>> Um but I think the more fundamental
limitation of these things is the
scalability problem, right? Like it is
just a vast amount of data to write down
every single SIS call that your thing
ever did. You're already doing a
computationally expensive search. You
really don't want to like hugely
increase the overhead of that. And it
doesn't actually get you true
determinism.
>> It lets you replay a non-deterministic
run.
>> Correct.
>> But it doesn't let you play a deter It
doesn't let you play things out a
deterministic way cuz every time you do
a thing you haven't previously captured.
>> Correct.
>> You just got to do it.
>> Exactly.
>> Right. Exactly.
>> So it's like it's a weird halfway house,
right?
>> Exactly. So basically what we decided to
do was just go another step beyond that
and say okay we're going to do the
dependency injection as you put it at an
even lower level. Let's just get under
the operating system and let's implement
a deterministic computer which is a
thing that you can do these days without
creating custom silicon because people
have virtual machines. Hooray. So
basically we just have to write a
hypervisor that emulates a fully
deterministic machine and then we don't
have to touch your OS at all. We don't
have to touch anything you do at all.
You can just run your stuff unmodified.
Right. And so your your like crazy hard
thing to do is possible because people
did a super weird crazy hard thing to do
years ago. And this was like part of the
historical failure of the operating
system where it's like oh we're going to
use the operating system like back in
the 60s or 70s where like it's have
these multi-user operating systems. are
going to have ways of isolating
different programs from each other and
stuff and then like some number of years
we're going to be like oh yeah none of
this works actually Unix is like very
badly designed and doesn't solve any of
these problems so instead we're going to
have a new abstraction where we are
going to like simulate things at the
level of machines the hypervisor is
basically the computer on that sort of
whose upward interface it exposes is a
fake machine and lets you run different
virtual machines on that hypervisor
>> and then once you have the hypervisor in
some sense the path is clear right
that's the layer at which like in some
sense before we said oh all the
non-determinism comes from the operating
system
>> but no it comes from the CPU
>> it comes from the well
>> it comes from the hardware from the
timers right it comes from
>> all the different pieces of hardware
introducing that so you got to be like
oh we just got that's the layer that at
which the nondeterminism comes and
that's the layer at which we can instead
do a deterministic simulation of what a
machine is
>> correct and our hypervisor is a little
bit more ambitious than just being a
deterministic hypervisor which was
already kind of hard but in order to
make this really work well, it also
needs to be really fast, right? Close to
native speed or even in some weird cases
a little faster than native speed for
most code, which is an interesting thing
that we have pulled off. But then
there's another property that's also
really important, which is we are trying
to do this huge branching exploration
through the state space of a computer
system. And so if we're running down
multiple branches on the same physical
host that is running the hypervisor,
it's really annoying if we have to like
store a separate copy of the memory for
each of the guest operating systems
that's running inside of it. That would
be a lot of RAM, right? And so what we
do instead is we dduplicate memory pages
at the host level using copy on write.
So that if you know one of the guests is
doing something and it doesn't affect
some particular page in memory it just
inherits a copy of that from its
ancestor and you know sibling VMs can
just be addressing the same underlying
memory on the host system which means
that we can do this with massive
concurrency on very big computers and
you know explore really fast.
>> Got it. Okay. So this kind of like
brings into focus like what is the thing
that antithesis is providing in the end,
right? It's trying to give like all of
the upsides you described of having this
very powerful testing system that can
efficiently explore lots of different
behavior.
>> Um but it does it in a way where the
amount of work that you have to do to
use the system is very low.
>> That's right.
>> It's just like it's like what is your
API to antithesis? It's actually what
you're doing already. like you threw a
bunch of stuff in a Docker container
before, you throw a bunch of stuff in
Docker container, now you're just like
running a VM somewhere. It's like, yeah,
you just run a VM somewhere else. You
run a VM on on antithesis's servers and
then they can get they they get to like
use all of this fancy tech to make it
efficient and be able to do all this
exploration and like you don't have to
do anything clever to make your system
testable. That's right.
>> It's just like
>> we magically find all the bugs and
they're magically reproducible. That's
right. It's very straightforward and you
know and and the key there right I said
we magically find all the bugs that's
the second really hard thing I mentioned
right once you've made the system
deterministic you still need to find all
the bugs right you still need to do this
state space exploration and you now need
to do it because you've enabled
exploration of way more complicated
computer programmers than parsers you
know and little data structures written
in hasll and so on you now need really
really smart state space exploration,
but because we have determinism, we can
be smart about it. It doesn't degrade
the random search. And so we've also
got, you know, a whole large chunk of
our company that is like doing
fundamental research on how to like do
this data exploration faster and more
efficiently for wider and wider classes
of programs. So to jump back for a
second to like the initial framing of
like this is all kind of comes out of
like property based testing in a sense.
We spent an enormous amount of time
talking about one half of property based
testing which is essentially the random
generation of the the generation
essentially of the probability
distributions right how you explore the
space and a bunch on the mechanics of
how you run it but very little on the
properties
>> right and like you know if you want to
find all the bugs right you have to know
what the program's supposed to do in the
first place. So like how do how do
properties fit into this story?
>> Right. So so this is actually a little
bit easier than people think it is. Um
and I believe that like I think a lot of
the problem here actually is that
property based testing was invented by
like mathematicians and functional
programming people who were thinking of
it in the same you same area as like
formal methods and stuff like that. You
know, my colleague David McKver calls
this the original sin of property based
testing is that like people were coming
from this very very mathematical
background and so they they were
thinking of it as like you have to
exhaustively enumerate all of the
properties of your system. And my belief
is that you don't actually have to do
that. And the reason why I don't think
you have to do that is that computers
and computer programs are very chaotic
and they are very good at escalating any
misbehavior of your program into much
more obvious and extravagant
misbehavior. And so you can actually
catch a very very large number of bugs
with a partially specified system. So to
give you a concrete example of this,
right? Like if I have some memory
corruption in my C++ program, you know,
and I don't have asan enabled, so I'm
not going to find the memory corruption
directly, that could still manifest in a
lot of ways. It could manifest as my
program giving wrong answers. It could
manifest as like weird garbage or
glitches, you know, in in some response
I get. It could manifest as a crash. It
could manifest as an infinite loop. it
could manifest as like corruption of
some other random invariant in my
program somewhere. And so if I have a
property that's set up to catch any of
those things, there's like a decent
chance that when I shake the box enough,
I will be able to detect that bug even
though I haven't thoroughly specified
every aspect of its behavior. And that
same that same idea actually it actually
is true for much broader classes of bug
than than memory corruption. So I think
what you're saying is like true for a
part of the space, but I don't think
you're going to get all the bugs that
way, right? There are I think there are
lots of areas and I think we as as
computer scientists and really as
software engineers rely on this kind of
brittleleness property all over the
place, right? Where like you know the
fact that you can like find the bugs
that you can
>> it's actually kind of why normal
non-randomized testing works so well. I
think
>> that's right. But I I also think whether
it works depends on the kind of things
you're doing and the way that the code
is structured in important ways. Like
the most obvious exception to this is
numerical bugs
>> where like numerical bugs just don't
show up this way. Like you get the
calculation a little bit wrong and then
like you know your curve doesn't go up
into the right quite at the speed that
you want it to but it's often very hard
to get any kind of bright line
demonstration that you've done something
wrong and know where you've done
something wrong.
>> That's right.
>> Um I think there are other properties
too. I mean from archive if you're if
you're building a trading system and
like the trading system might operate
perfectly well and it never like breaks
but like it's just like more aggressive
than it should be. it sends larger
orders more often or less often or not
placed quite properly in the book. And I
think if you don't do a good job of
specifying the properties, I think those
kind of systems are very hard to test
and this kind of coarse grained well
let's kind of look for like gross
misbehavior and shake the box a lot is
just like not going to get those things
at all.
>> Yeah. So totally agree with you. What
I've said so far only covers a subset of
the bugs. Um, I think that there are a
lot of other ways to add and refine
properties incrementally. Like the key
like I, you know, I am interested in how
to do this absolutely perfectly because
I'm a testing fanatic, but I'm also like
a pragmatic business owner, right? So I
want to give customers like an easy way
on which is just, you know, add the most
basic possible properties that all
software should have. And then I want to
give them a nice gentle ramp towards
more advanced usage. And I think what
the nice gentle ramp looks like for most
people who are not sophisticated
property based testing experts is
actually others have already done it for
us. I think it looks like observability
and alerting like if you think about a
system like cloudatch or a system like
data dog or whatever they have already
built in some sense like the the second
half of a property based testing system
right you can specify what you don't
want to see and then you can define
alerts on those things hey memory of
this thing should never exceed this
number oh my gosh if you ever see this
log message I want to be alerted right
away those are all properties
like they're not very good properties,
but they're
and I think the reason the main reason
they're inadequate is that with
something like Cloudatch or something
like Data Dog, you only find out that
those properties have been violated when
your customers do. Um, right? If you
could move that experience, that UX into
the testing world into before you
deploy, I think it's actually an amazing
sort of interactive way of defining and
then refining your systems properties.
And I think it's a thing that's like
actually quite accessible and intuitive
to quote unquote normal developers.
I see why you say that, but I worry
actually that observability style
approaches will scale very poorly
because part of what as I understand it,
the antithesis approach relies on is the
ability to take the work you're doing,
the testing work you're doing and run it
at kind of massive like incomprehensible
scale. Mhm.
>> And I think observability rules tend to
rely on the fact that you know you see
the things as often as they happen in
real life and so you can get away with
like soft properties that aren't quite
the properties that you care about but
are like indicators of and predictors of
the things that you care about. So there
you know you sort of get to specify
things to flag you and the key thing is
to make them not flag you incorrectly
too often. But I feel like something
like antithesis depends pretty
critically on the violations being real
at a high rate because otherwise you're
just going to like antithesis is going
to say, "Oh, we did your run and you
have like 68 million exceptions. You
might want to look at which ones are
real."
>> Totally. Totally. You should definitely
not take every single thing that you
know that you that you would find
interesting in your observability system
or whatever and and and turn it into a
property, right? But I think taking the
ones that would paid you and turning
them into properties is a great way to
get people who have never thought about
property based testing to start thinking
about what the properties of their
system might be. I think the other thing
that can help here is like a little bit
of the Socratic method, right? Like a
thing I found when talking to customers
is often, you know, if you ask somebody
like, "What are the properties of your
system?" They get this like deer in the
headlights look and they're like, "Oh my
god, get me out of here." Um, you know,
and then if you say to them, hey, should
your system always return an answer if
two out of three replicas are up?
They're like, yeah, yeah, totally. And
if you're like, okay, cool. Like, do you
expect that answer to come within some
defined SLA? They're like, oh, yeah,
obviously. And like, okay, great. And
it's like, okay, well, should the
system, you know, should two users ever
be able to stomp on each other's data?
Like, no, no, definitely not. Like, and
so you can kind of tease it out of
people. And I think that one thing that
we're very interested in experimenting
with is like can we automate teasing it
out of people a little bit?
>> You need to completely train an LLM to
like have the dialogue with customers to
figure out
>> or to just look at their code and to
guess at some properties and then
present them to the user being like,
hey, are these properties of your
system? Um, and by the way, even if the
user says that they're not properties of
their system, they're often pretty good
guideposts in the state space
exploration because they're often the
kinds of thing that some other developer
at that company might have mistaken as a
property of the system, which means that
if you get it to happen, it might lead
to a bug later on.
Do you want to present those
semi-propies to the like you the person
who owns the system or do you want to
present it to antithesis and see whether
it follows it and then like I feel like
you want to classify there's the
properties that are like seem to always
be followed and like maybe those are
properties and then there's the ones
that are not followed at all and like
those you discard and then there are the
ones that like are mostly followed and
maybe those are the interesting ones.
>> Yeah, this is actually this is so this
is not an original idea. Um, this is an
idea that the fuzzing people came up
with relatively recently, but they did
come up with it first. Um, I think they
call it speculative
speculative properties. I forget exactly
what the term it's. in a paper
somewhere. But basically the the fuzzing
spin on this is, you know, I look at a
function that I've executed a million
times and if I see that like one of the
parameters is positive every single time
that function is executed, I just go
ahead and add an assertion that that
parameter will always be positive. And
often like if I then like often that
just is a property and then even if it's
not right it's very likely that if every
time I execute it the thing is positive
and then I get it to be negative one
time that's going to lead to some
interesting behavior later in the system
possibly a bug because everybody else
assumed it was always positive. And so
the idea is like we can both use it to
guide exploration and use it as like a
kind of you know preemptive uh property
creation.
So I want to step back for a second.
Like I think a meta thing I'm observing
from this whole conversation is I wonder
how you sell things to customers, right?
Like there's like I feel like this this
whole conversation about like what I
think of as a really compelling and
important kind of superpower that you
can give software engineering teams, but
we've already had like a pretty long and
complicated story to like explain what's
actually going on. like to go to the the
perspective for a second of somebody
running a business like how do you think
about convincing people that this is
like a thing they should be excited
about and want to pay for?
>> How do we sell to you? So that's a good
question actually right uh how did we
actually get to antithesis um a little
randomly actually so from our
perspective like one of our engineers is
someone who just like followed the
foundation DB work and kind of knew
about it and thought it was cool and was
wondering what those people were doing
and at some point saw an antithesis web
page go up and was like oh we have
testing problems maybe this would be
good right this was someone who's
working on our kind of ultra low latency
team that does a lot of very complicated
multi-system extremely subtle behavior
kind of stuff and was like, "Oh, it'd be
nice to have like deterministic testing
for this. Maybe that would be good." And
so we reached out and set up some
conversations. Um, I got to sit in on a
couple of them. Um, not not because we
were like, "Oh, you know, we need like
the old guy who's been here for a long
time, but more because I'm like nerdly
really interested in testing stuff." So,
I thought it would be interesting. Um,
and then you know, one of our engineers,
a guy named Doug Patty, who's actually
previously been on the show, uh, decided
to try it out with Arya, which is one of
our internally developed distributed
systems that already has a ton of very
careful work on the testing. Indeed,
it's one of the one of the places where
we've done a lot of very careful work
around deterministic simulation testing.
>> Um, and yet, we thought there was some
actual real value ad from Antithesis's
version of this. Uh and that's basically
how how we found you guys. Um but it's
like a very like expert oriented people
who are already in the tank kind of
customer acquisition story. It's like
the people who already built their own
deterministic simulation framework are
like you know we'd like a better one.
>> Yeah. Well, we had a
>> we're not I don't think we're a big
audience. No, we we we actually had a
debate internally um in the early days
which was would people who have already
are already doing fuzzing or PBT or
deterministic simulation would they be
better customers right because they are
into this stuff or would they be worse
customers because they already have one
and they're not going to pay a lot of
money for another one and it turned out
that they're very conclusively better
customers but as you say there's not
that many of people like you and so
you're right we do have to make it we do
have to make it broader there's there's
a few arguments that we use and then I
think there's like a few trends that are
really really acting in our favor. Um
and that are giving us actually
considerable success in selling this to
normal people. Not saying you're
abnormal. Um
>> all good. I wouldn't object if you had.
>> Um basically that the two main
arguments, right, are like safety and
speed, right? And and you can think of
those things as being on a frontier,
right? for a given level of programming
technology and skill and architecture
and language choices and problem domain
and whatever there's some like efficient
frontier between safety like how sure
you are that your program has no bugs
and speed which is like how fast can you
add new features and and solve business
problems and I think of a tool like
antithesis as just pushing that frontier
outward and you can decide to reap the
benefits in more safety Right? You can
keep going at the same speed but be
really really really sure you don't have
any bugs which might be the right call
if you're making pacemakers or like
airplane guidance software or something
like that. Or you can just keep the same
level of quality but do everything a lot
faster because you're not writing as
many tests because when you do hit bugs
you're hitting them in your tests rather
than in production. you're not doing
some really long slow boring triage
process with a badly written bug report
from a customer while you're not
sleeping and you know so on right you so
you can just go faster with the same
level of quality or you can kind of get
a little bit of both and you know I
think we have we sort of have all three
kinds of customers I would say and
they're all you know they're all getting
some real benefit from it somewhere on
that frontier um I think the trend that
has there's sort of two trends that have
helped us a lot. One is just that all
kinds of software is now
either responsible for very very
critical stuff that needs to keep
working or responsible for making lots
and lots of money and needs to keep
working and keep getting better at
making money. And so, you know, a lot of
people a lot more people care relative
to 10 or 20 years ago that their
software works correctly and that
they're able to continue developing.
>> There are more critical systems. That's
right. Um the other trend that I think
has been really good for us is like AI
code generation which hugely increases
the salience of all these issues and you
know I think moreover just has like
made everybody realize the liked doll's
law nature of
being able to verify that your software
works correctly like being a critical
limiting factor in how much software you
can write. And I believe this was always
true, right? And it just like wasn't
obvious enough to people. But now it's
like really, really, really obvious to
people, right? I can have 10 clawed
codes all writing code and it doesn't
matter. I'm not going to go any faster
if I can't merge those PRs after
reviewing them and actually deciding
they work,
>> right? And like the two paths towards
this is one is figure out ways of making
your software less critical,
>> right? Right? And if you can find a
domain where you can like do a lot of
stuff where the state where you can get
value out of it but correctness isn't
incredibly important, you can move at
lightning speed and that's great. And
there's all sorts of cases where this is
true. Like if I am like a software
developer who wants an analysis tool to
understand what's going on in my
program. It's like you know it doesn't
have to be all that right. It can like
help me mo some of the time and not
succeed other time and it's kind of
fine. It's kind of a throwaway tool that
I just make and use and like that's
super great. You can just like vibe code
that and it's awesome. And by the way, I
think there will be many successful
companies built to make it easier to
have that kind of software. Things like
zerorust hosting, you know, things like
very powerful security guarantees around
a piece of software so it can't do any
damage. You know, things
>> security guarantees and I think also
just like picking the right abstraction
boundaries. Yes. Figuring out if I want
to make this whole thing useful, what
pieces have to be reliable and what
pieces don't have to be reliable. So
it's like there's a whole new kind of
software engineering challenge of how do
you build these architectures that let
you leverage less reliable code. So
that's like one direction to go and the
other direction is just getting much
better at verifying.
>> That's right. That's right. And and
right now I think that has suddenly
become suddenly become interesting. It's
very hot all of a sudden which is kind
of fun because you know this was like a
backwater in some ways a deliberately
chosen backwater for for a long time and
uh and now there's all this now there's
all this interest.
>> What do you mean by a deliberately
chosen backwater? Oh, if you are like I
sure so basically if you're trying to
decide what to make a career in, right?
I talked before about how you know
there's a lot of careers where you're
not going to have worldclass success
unless you are at an extreme of the of
the distribution of people
>> like being a violinist or a
mathematician.
>> Correct. One good way to be at the
extreme of the distribution is to pick
something where nobody else who is very
talented is interested in it. And then
it just is actually much much much
easier. And it's, you know, it's um
it's, you know, you have to you you
can't pick like, you know, making paper
airplanes or whatever, right? Like
nobody super talented is interested in
that because there's not a ton of
economic benefit in that, not a lot of
benefit to the world in that. But if you
can find a sweet spot where something is
like both really really really important
but for some reason nobody else has
noticed it's really really really
important or people know it but they
don't want to do it anyway
>> cuz it's painful
>> because it's painful or because it sucks
or because it's low status right like
that's just like that's actually an
>> testing is boring an incredible
arbitrage opportunity and so that was
actually a lot of why I got interested
in testing is this is like Jan antorial
work. All developers hate it. Like you
know the number of smart people who have
thought about software testing is very
low because
>> although I have to say like so when I
started at Jane Street like I was like
super incompetent like I you know what
did I have? I had a PhD in computer
science which is like doesn't tell you
how to be a software engineer and I was
like not super good at it and I didn't
know anything about testing. Um, but
just like over time, over the many years
of thinking about these systems and
building them, I've
>> come to realize that not just testing is
important, but it's like super
interesting and fun, like when you do it
well, right? There's a lot of
engineering work that it's one of these
things that if you don't do the work to
build good systems for it, it's horrible
and nobody likes to do it. You like, you
know, there are lots of companies that
solve this problem by hiring a whole
different tier of people to be like the
testers because it's like so low status
that you can't get like the real
software engineers to do it. So you get
like other classes of people to do it
and you just like make it a different
class job and it seems like a terrible
way to run a business.
>> Yeah. I I I actually believe that the
world is like fractally full of things
that are incredibly interesting and
incredibly ignored by the entire world.
I believe that there is tremendous
lowhanging fruit here. It's not just
software testing like things that are
super economically valuable, super
interesting and that nobody is doing.
The the the key though is even if you
find such a thing, your problems have
not ended because now you need to
convince other people that it is
actually super exciting and cool, which
you might be able to do like kind of
one-on-one, but like if you want to
start a successful company, you need to
somehow make yourself legible to capital
in the in the words of of somebody who I
like. Um so, you know, that's a whole
another challenge. We got a little bit
lucky there, right? as soon as you know
as as our company was growing and
scaling we'd kind of laid all the
groundwork and the foundations here and
then suddenly this giant thing happened
in the world that made what we were
doing super legible to capital and you
know that that was just like a nice
stroke of luck I think we would have
succeeded anyway but it it's always nice
when things break in your
>> right so what you should ideally do is
pick like a neglected area of the world
operate in stealth for a while get a
head start and then cause the area to
suddenly not be neglected
>> that's right
>> but only after you have done a lot of
pre-work
>> that's right That's what we somehow
managed to do.
>> Actually, the capital thing is a thing
that may be a good thing to talk about
for a second. So, like one one thing
that that that we got involved with. So,
we started using antithesis as a product
and we're like excited about the actual
results. I guess a thing I didn't say
before which was one one thing that made
us really happy about it is it like
actually found bugs that we didn't find
before. It allowed us to do more
aggressive, larger scale kinds of
simulations even though we already had a
deterministic simulation.
>> And your systems were really well
tested,
>> right? Really well tested and had a
really good record of a low number of
bugs in production. But the curse of a
system that has a really good level, a
really good record of very few bugs in
production is people start relying on it
having a very good record of very few
bugs in production in the future. And so
the stakes go higher and you end up
using it for more and you want to put
more engineering into making it yet more
reliable.
>> That's a super interesting testing
problem in its own right. By the way,
like if your if your system performs
better than its SLA, all everybody who
depends on you will start to assume in
code and otherwise that it will always
perform better than SLA. And then if you
ever merely meet your SLA, everything
will go down and crash.
Yeah, that's basically right. I've often
wondered what are SLAs's for. I have not
found like the whole like form of an SLA
to be a particularly useful like
engineering mechanism like in practice.
We at at foundation DB we actually
invented a technique didn't I mean we
invented it but others have invented it
too but like we call the technique
bugification and the basic idea is if
you have a piece of code that you have
written well such that it 99.99% of the
time does way better than its promise
right like you know it returns an
optional value but it always returns a
value um you should when running in test
sometimes just make it do the
pathological thing with some low but
real probability
So that depends on that code, all the
callers get used to the fact that it can
like exercise its full its full spectrum
of behavior.
>> Right. And I guess famously Netflix was
like, actually, we'll do this in
production,
>> right? That's the whole chaos monkey
idea.
>> I'm not such a fan of that.
>> Yeah, we we've there's there have been
spots where we've used it. I I have
complicated feelings about it. I do feel
like it degrades the quality of your
overall service in a way that is often
just economically inefficient and you
just don't want
>> I think Amazon actually might offer a an
entire region where like you deploy your
code there and their services will
region
>> they'll just like return 500 sometimes
you know whenever you know yeah it
actually a pretty good idea
>> yeah certainly seems good as like a mode
of testing
>> yeah sorry you were saying I yeah so I
guess we're talking I guess we're
talking capital. So we got involved as
customers. We found it like useful for
finding real bugs. We found that again
like in in in the way that you might
expect increased the ambition of the
kinds of things that we would try to do,
right? There are like things that we are
willing to experiment with that are
riskier but we feel like more of that
risk is tamped down by the better
testing story. So it's been like a very
positive experience for the places that
we've applied it. Uh, and then we got
involved actually in leading antithesis
series A. It was pretty cool,
>> which was like,
>> yeah, which I think I think you guys
found to be a little bit of an
interesting and weird experience and we
found to be a kind of novel experience,
too. And I'm kind of curious how it felt
from your perspective.
>> Yeah. Well, you guys haven't invested in
very many companies. So, it was not a
thing that we thought was even on the
table or likely to happen. I think it
basically happened as like a happy
coincidence. you heard through the
grapevine that we were raising money and
then I think your one of your corp dev
people came and and chatted with us and
we were initially like oh yeah whatever
like they want to do some small
strategic investment and then I think he
was like you know we would consider
leading the round and we were like what
like that's completely unheard of um but
it was actually an incredible experience
um you know Silicon Valley VCs are great
and they have many forms of knowledge
and they have many form like they have
deep networks and they have deep
experience from working with many many
companies that lets them give you all
kinds of good advice but they are
generally not super active users of your
product. Um and and
>> certainly not of this product.
>> Certainly not of this product. That's
right. That's right. Maybe Carta like
had an easier time with that. Um, and so
like I think, you know, I think one of
the amazingly cool things about having
Jane Street as an investor is just that
like I feel so very aligned in terms of
like you understand our vision and what
we want to do, you know, like you guys
give us like constant good ideas about
the product and like strategic
perspective on the world informed by
your use of it as a customer. It's like
a very different kind of advice than
most investors can give and like we've
already got the Silicon Valley VCs,
right? Like we we have that and so
having you guys as well just feels like
an incredible superpower.
>> Yeah. And I do think this lines up. I
mean we're you know we are we are not
certainly not primarily and not majorly
like a VC. That's not the primary at all
the primary thing we do. But we have
been doing more and more investments
over the year over the years and and
those investments have mostly been in
the form of companies where we are
connected to the underlying work where
we care about it are customers or want
to be customers of it and we feel like
we have direct kind of subject matter
expertise on the area in question and
that we really believe in the product
and think it's great and want to use it
ourselves and I think that's the kind of
thing where we think we actually have
some meaningful leverage.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And I think you guys have
done quite well. I think, you know,
you're not VCs, but I think you've
you've done a pretty good job of
spotting opportunities like, and I think
you've you've got a track record of
spotting them sort of before they become
quote unquote legible to capital. Like,
I think you guys were very early in
anthropic, if I don't if I don't
misremember. And I think you guys
invested in anthropic at a time when
they actually had trouble raising money,
hard as that might be to believe. um you
know because you saw something that
others didn't you know and I think with
us right like you invested in I mean
like three months is like a very long
time in in tech these days like I think
you know today
every single investor is probably lining
up to invest in testing companies
because it feels so salient you know
with with with AI codegen but like three
months ago when you guys made this
investment
no investor had ever heard of software
testing or cared like to a first
approximation and you know I talked to a
lot of people who were like nobody has
ever made a software testing company
that has made any money like why do you
think you'll be any different and who
like really needed to hear arguments
right whereas I think you guys sort of
spotted that opportunity before the
professionals did and it's worth saying
I think we were interested in and
excited about antithesis and the value
it provided independent of the AI angle
right I think the AI angle added a lot
more but I to some degree I think we
share some of your basic intuition that
this stuff has always been important.
>> Um but it definitely as a kind of you
know market hypothesis makes a lot more
sense in the present world where this
stuff is becoming more salient because
of of the challenge of verifying AI
generated code. I I'm actually curious
how you think about the product really
working in this context because in some
ways I think it's a really good fit
>> and in some ways it's not quite perfect
right because one of the critical things
that you want
>> both when you're thinking about RL right
you want to like
>> provide feedback to agents as you are
training them and then also when you
actually try and use this stuff is you
want reliable feedback on whether the
thing that they did is good but you also
want fast feedback Anti antithesis is
good at a lot of things, but it's not
like super fast, right? When you send
kick off an antithesis run to find your
bugs, you know, you know, you might come
back tomorrow to look at the results.
>> So, I I actually think that last I I do
think that there are ways it doesn't fit
well, but I think that last thing you
said is a unfortunate current limitation
that is like highly contingent and will
not be for long. Um, basically
antithesis began like its bread and
butter was like very very large
distributed systems and those very large
distributed systems tend to just kind of
be expensive to run period. And so there
was not tremendous
like pressure on us to make all of the
constant factors of running our software
like really zippy and snappy. And you
know
basically people who were who were
testing this stuff were just okay with
getting a relatively slow answer and so
we weren't under a lot of pressure to to
do otherwise. Um as we move beyond
distributed systems which we are doing
this year you know that equation changes
and I think you are going to see that
antithesis gets way faster at giving
results and we have a lot of really
really cool projects underway that are
that are going to enable that and make
that possible. And by the way I think
that even for distributed systems you
might be able to start getting pretty
fast results. Like I don't think there's
a law of the universe which says you
can't test a distributed system fast.
Um, at Foundation DB, we often got good
quality answers within minutes or tens
of minutes. Um, very thorough answers.
Sometimes we'd even find the first bug
in less than a minute. And I think that
that is totally a thing that you will be
getting from antithesis, you know, in
the next year or so.
>> So, what are ways in which beyond the
kind of time time scale issues, what are
ways in which you think maybe it doesn't
solve all the problems for
>> Oh, for AI in particular?
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Well, so okay, there's a few
things.
Let's let's talk first about what I
consider the most fundamental one and I
think the most interesting one and I
don't think that this is like
catastrophic but I think it's like an
interesting challenge that everybody
who's doing any kind of you know
autonomous software verification whether
that's property based testing or formal
methods or code review or whatever is in
my opinion not thinking about. Okay. So
code generation tools, code synthesis
tools, specificationdriven
tools like that have existed since way
before chat GPT existed, right? These
have existed for 20, 30 years. And
nobody ever used them because they suck,
>> right?
>> And why did they suck? Basically because
they all acted like evil genies. you
would say exactly what you wanted the
program to do and the, you know, nonLM
program synthesis machine would crank
out a program that exactly matched your
specification and totally did not do
what you wanted to do.
>> Yep.
>> Right. You you've had experience with
this.
>> Yeah. Yeah, I mean I've been sort of
paying attention to like the program
synthesis literature for a long time and
like it is there's a lot of really great
research and a lot of great researchers
doing interesting stuff but remarkably
little practical applications in it and
all the things that people work on end
up looking mostly like toys like I think
maybe like the single most successful
like program synthesis style thing is
like Microsoft flashfill in Excel which
is like you know pretty good but like I
feel like for all the like smart work
that's gone into this stuff, you would
expect like in some ways to have more
practical impact. But like the problem
is just really hard to do well. And I
think in some ways one of the reasons
why LLMs are better than classic program
synthesis and is that there are less
evil genies. Yes.
>> And like they're not really
specification driven. They're like vibes
driven. like you say and it makes some
inferences and there's a lot of like
leaning on the priors of the thing it's
seen in the past and what it generates
and it's just optimizing less.
>> Exactly. Exactly. Exactly. Exactly.
>> And of course the RL process makes it
optimize more. Right. So this whole
thing where you have basically uh like
eval hacking where it like does kind of
whatever it can do to try and get like
the light to turn green, right? This is
a problem with like LLM. It's a problem
with people, right? Sometimes like you
have some system where you have some
checks in place and like a thing we talk
about internally is like don't just play
the video game, right? You don't just
try and like score. You want to actually
like do the right thing and use the
alerting as a way of understanding
what's going wrong. But if you turn the
alerting into the the thing that you're
actually optimizing for, very bad stuff
happens.
>> Goodart's law. Yeah.
>> Yes.
>> Yeah. So that's exactly right.
Basically, basically the reason I
personally thought that AI code
generation wouldn't go anywhere like a
year or two ago because of exactly this.
I had experience with program synthesis
tools. I was like, "Oh, they're all evil
genies. They suck." You know, I think a
lot of people who had experience with
these tools had the same kind of
reaction. And what we all missed was
exactly the thing you just said. LLMs
are not like they actually want to make
you happy, right? Like like
>> for good and ill.
>> Exa Exactly. They're like the the
sycophency thing is like there's
actually a nice a nice flip side to it.
Like they've been trained on like
zillions and zillions of examples of
people on Reddit and Stack Overflow
being helpful and then they've been RLHF
by people who reward it for being
helpful and and so it actually is kind
of trying to write the code that you're
asking for as opposed to like write code
that fits the specification that you
asked for in the least amount of work or
whatever. And what happens when you put
these things in a loop with something
that's like, eh, no, try again. Ah, no,
try. Right. Like, it kind of shifts it
back into being an evil genie a little
bit.
>> That's right. Although, to be clear, I
think that the people who are doing the
training are no fools. And that, you
know, you've talked to some people who
do this kind of training work and they
pull they pull the system simultaneously
in multiple directions, right? There are
things that you do to pull it in the
direction of trying to just satisfy the
immediate feedback goal and also trying
to pull it in the direction of like
fitting more the general distribution
and not just kind of totally getting
completely twisted out.
>> Yes. But the problem is that when you're
done training, when you're actually
running this thing, if you run it in a
loop, it's it's still pushing it back
towards being an evil genie. Not in
terms of like shifting its weights and
and so on, but just in terms of its
behavior and what it tries next. Like
I've seen this happen even with just
very very very
not sophistic like not property based
testing right like I have clog code and
I'm like hey do this thing for me and
make sure the tests all pass and like if
the thing is hard and it can't do it
correctly eventually it deletes the
tests or like or eventually it like
makes the test pass in some trivial way
or in some way that is totally not what
I want and
>> I do think this is getting a little
better but the phenomenon is still very
strong.
>> Yes. And I think I basically think that
the more powerful and unyielding the
validation step is probably the worse
this overall effect gets.
>> Yeah. And another I think general
problem with these issues, we talked
before about the kind of functional
properties of the software that you're
optimizing for and then the
non-functional properties like all these
kind of architectural and clarity and
extensibility properties
>> and those probably get worse. Yeah.
>> Right. Because if you look at the agents
in their efficacy depends a lot on those
non-functional properties. They just do
better in context where things are
tighter and more extensible and easier
to understand and where the systems are
fundamentally simpler, but they're super
bad at maintaining those properties.
>> Um, I feel like the the the thing that
Anthropic came out with of like the C
compiler that they built was a really
interesting example where the they got
really far. They built like a pretty
good compiler. I mean, not actually a
good compiler. You wouldn't want to use
it for anything. But like an impressive,
it was an impressive technical feat.
>> You know, it's a little bit like the
talking dog. It's, you know, it's not
it's not that what it says is so great.
It's that it talks at all. Like that
they got a compiler that got to that
level is is is impressive.
>> But the thing a lot of people have
focused on like, oh, you know, it didn't
do any typeing and it didn't do this and
it didn't do that. And that's like a
little interesting, but the thing I was
more struck by was the way in which it
ended. And they were unable to make
future progress to make more progress
with this like team of agents approach
because it just started to be the case
that as the agents started to make
improvements they would break other
stuff at such a rate that they couldn't
actually net
>> which is an experience that every junior
engineer has had too right like and it's
why things like architecture matter and
it's why things like you know
>> making your system like actually fit
together in a minimal and clean way and
have concerns be orthogonal and well
factored and all that stuff. Yeah, it's
just like a bringing to life the like
deconstruction of the non-functional
properties of your software, right?
>> Uh and that's I think that's one of the
reasons why, you know, it seems to me
like testing while still important just
isn't enough, right? You still need to
think about architecture. You still
think need to think about the
cleanliness of the code and all of that.
Like it's not I think it's it's you just
you just have to maintain those
nonfunctional properties. And and it's
possible that if you put an LLM or an
agent swarm or something in a loop with
a really strong test or a really strong
formal verification system or something,
it's just going to make the architecture
worse and worse in order to get the test
to pass. Like that seems like a very
plausible failure mode.
>> Yep.
So how do you think about
kind of the completeness of antithesis
as an approach, right? Like to what
degree are you like an antithesis
maximalist? I mean I don't so much mean
antithesis the product but the approach
right the approach is like we are going
to have a kind of ability to do these
high-powered endto-end randomized tests
of our systems in a way that like are
very crosscutting and can test check
lots of different properties. That's not
the only way to write tests, right? You
know, you know, there's like the classic
I'm going to like at a small scale write
a unit test which like sticks an example
in there and see whether the example
behaves in the way that I want. Like
>> to what degree do you think this the
antithesis approach is really the
approach that people should be doubling
down on and to what degree do you think,
you know, we should be throwing many
things at the wall?
>> Yep. So, I will first say that I I I
want to dispute the idea that there's an
antithesis approach. Um Okay. So the
thing the thing that we've told people
including all of our investors from the
start is that this is not a
solutionsbased company. It's a problem
based company. Like our goal is to make
software validation incredibly cheap and
easy and and like running water and find
all the bugs in all the software by any
means necessary. And it just so happens
that we thought that the lowest hanging
fruit, the best way to like start making
money and really start making a dent was
to do this deterministic simulation
thing and to make that cheap and easy
for people to to adopt. Um but you know
that is not the full extent of our
ambitions. If we someday you like you
know I I kind of dream of a day where
software engineers don't need to know
what deterministic simulation or unit
testing or formal methods or you know
concolic solving or or any of these
things are they just hand their software
to a box and you know and get back like
it worked or it didn't. And obviously
there's going to have to be a lot of
very complicated things that happen in
order to enable that vision. But like I
kind of yeah that that's the dream.
Okay. That said there's a reason we
started where we did and it's that I
think we do believe that this technique
is uniquely high leverage and a little
bit uniquely low adopted for how high
leverage it is. And you know I've seen
I have seen I have seen both situ. Okay.
So like our team right is always dog
fooding our own product which is a thing
that every team that's making a
developer tool should should do or
really any kind of tool. Um
>> it can be harder if it's not a tool that
you use right developer tools where it's
easiest.
>> Yes. And so we we you know that's both
fun. And I think I feel like that both
shows the power and the limitations of
the current basket of tools that we
offer to our customers. Like we have
gotten ridiculously far with just doing
antithesis style deterministic PBT on
everything that we write. Um including
like UI components, browserbased stuff,
you know, including like very low-level
things, just like everything. Um, we
have entire extremely complex systems
that are literally only tested with
antithesis and nothing else where like
nobody has written a unit test and we're
like one of the policies of that area of
the codebase is that people don't write
unit tests. You just add more, you know,
more sophistication to the property
based tests to cover whatever you need
to cover. And then there's some parts of
our code where I'm like, man, there
should just be a unit test here, you
know, and and that would make this a lot
more straightforward. And so I feel like
this is like kind of a wimpy answer to
your question, but I kind of feel like
there is a line, right? There is there
is a place at which you should just
write the stupid unit test or you should
not use testing at all. You should be
using something like proof-based
techniques because of the nature of your
problem domain or you should be using
exhaustive testing, right? Like if your
function takes an int32, you can just
try all of them.
>> Yep.
>> Won't take that long.
>> Definitely done that. Um, so like I I
think that that line does exist. I think
it is a lot farther away than most
people realize. Like I think more things
are amendable to property based testing
than people think and that if we can
make it easier and more powerful, people
will use it in more situations where
they don't currently use it.
>> Yeah, I think I I think that's right. I
and I think your point about it being
neglected essentially feels right to me
as well of like if you're going to see
where you can add a new thing and make a
big a big change. I feel like that's a
natural thing to work on. Um I do think
the other kind of testing is like really
important. I think there's a a kind of
like unreasonable effectiveness of
example based testing, right? Like I
think it's in some ways it's almost kind
of sounds like a comically bad idea of
like I'm going to have a big complicated
program and then I'm going to test it by
like writing six examples. Um, but like
to a surprising degree for like modest
complexity things, it actually like
works super well.
>> Um, and I think works especially well in
code bases that have other good
non-functional properties. Like a thing
I've long been struck by is the degree
to which having a really good and
expressive type system that like
captures a lot of useful properties of
your program and tests together kind of
there's a kind of multiplicative effect
where it has this very strong property
to kind of snap in place. Like you just
kind of put your finger on a couple of
spots and make sure that the behavior is
what you expect it is and like the kind
of analytic continuation of your
program. the rest of the behavior is
kind of smooth enough that there's kind
of like only one natural thing for it to
do and it kind of just like clicks in
and does that one thing.
>> Yes. I I think as a thing I've said
before is like, you know, there's this
funny thing about impossibility results
where they often are actually cluing you
into like a thing that you should really
try and do. And and the reason is that a
lot of impossibility results, this is
true in mathematics, true in computer
science, true everywhere, kind of rely
on this like anti-inductive property,
right? It's like it's like I'm going to
prove that the thing that you're trying
to do is impossible by constructing a
really fishly awful example and like ha
your technique fails here and I'm going
to adapt it based on the technique that
you're bringing, right? And like that's
kind of that's kind of how you know
impossibility results in mathematics
often work like diagonalization
arguments. It's also true in many famous
impossibility results in computer
science. And I think what's significant
about this is like we're not trying to
like we're not trying to find bugs in
every random touring machine or even in
a random touring machine drawn from the
space of all touring machines, right?
We're trying to find bugs in software
that people write to accomplish business
purposes. And that is a very very very
infiniteely small subset in the space of
all possible programs. And it's like a
really nice one, right? It's like, you
know, it's like it's like smooth
functions or functions that are
everywhere differentiable or something.
It's like, you know, it's like the these
are programs that people have built for
a reason and have built so that they can
like come back and modify them and
extend them someday. And I think it just
turns out that in that space of
programs, testing is actually way more
tractable than it would be in a
completely random, you know, random
program.
>> Yeah, there are tons of things like
this. Another fun example from our world
is uh type checking in Okamel and any
language in that ecosystem or in that
kind of rough space of languages is like
doubly exponential. Like you can write,
you know, an 18line program that will
not finish typeeing until the heat death
of the universe,
>> but nobody does. It turns out those
programs don't make any sense, right?
And you can find that like if you think
really hard, you can figure out what
those programs are, but they're not
actually a practical part of the actual
things that you run into when you when
you actually do the real work. And
again, I think this behavior of like
real world programs being a much
smoother, tamer, better behaved subspace
is a really important one for lots of
engineering questions.
>> It's true. Although we do trollishly
inside of our company have the like
inside joke like at our last company we
violated the cap theorem and at this one
we're violating the turn halting
theorem. So you we're just like moving
up the hierarchy of theorems.
>> Yeah. What's next? What's the next
theorem to violate?
>> I don't know. That's a good question.
>> It's a good it's a good company
formation question.
>> Yeah.
>> Um so we've talked a bunch about kind of
the kind of engineering practices you're
trying to create in the outside. um and
a little bit on your engineering
practices internally, but I'd like to
hear a little bit more about that like
what how does antithesis operate
internally.
>> Uh and I'm kind of curious how that how
that differs from what you guys see in
the outside.
>> Sure. So, I think um
I learned a a useful trick from somebody
recently, which is when you're talking
about your company's culture, like
culture is always a set of trade-offs,
right? There's no like purely good
cultural attribute. Yep.
>> They're all just like choices on a
spectrum and being one thing implies
that you are not the good things about
the opposite. And so I'm going to try
and phrase this in like the most edgy
way possible maybe. Um so
I think that we generally believe a
couple important premises that have led
us to pick a pretty pretty weird by by
outside standards place on a lot of
these culture spectrums. I think we
believe that
for many kinds of projects the overall
cost of the project is dominated by the
number of mistakes you make. Like like
big architectural mistakes early on in a
project can just have like an
exponential effect on the amount of work
that it takes to get the project done. I
think we also believe
that one of the biggest scalability
barriers to
human organizations is communication and
that one of the things that is worst for
communication is like lack of trust. Um
and
yeah, let's just start there. So, so
given that you believe these things
about the world, like what would you
want your engineering culture to look
like? Well, basically we try really,
really, really hard to talk a lot about
what we're going to do before we do it
and to debate multiple possibilities for
how we could accomplish some important
objective before we like go all in on
one. And that doesn't mean that we don't
prototype. Like often these discussions
do involve people bringing prototypes
and showing them to each other and and
debating the merits of them. But like it
is it is basically considered like
uncuthter
and then explain why you picked this one
over that other one and then explain why
you don't think there's a great third
alter alternative, right? Like and that
I think drives some people completely
insane. Like like there's there's a lot
of people who are just like, "Man, I
want to put on my headphones. I want to
write my code. Leave me alone." and like
they just won't have a great time at
antithesis where people are going to
walk by and be like and there you know
we all work in a big open room exactly
like you guys do here and people will
just come look at your screen and be
like hey why are you doing that you know
which is like not a thing that would
happen at some other companies I've
worked at um so we're highly
collaborative highly deliberative
you know collaborative does mean that
we're all in a physical office together
for the most part because it's you know
adding any friction to communication
just means that you get a whole lot less
of it.
>> Sure.
>> Um it means that we don't really care
about hierarchy very much. Like there is
hierarchy. Every human society and
organization has hierarchy. Um
>> I've heard you're the CEO.
>> That's right. But like everybody's
opinions can be questioned and debated
and like you know just because somebody
is the big boss of some particular part
of our software architecture does not
mean that they get to sort of be
dictatorial or rule by fiat. Like people
people can just come and be like I think
you're making a stupid decision and
that's like a very normal thing and we
try to praise people for sticking their
necks out and making statements like
that.
>> Yeah. A lot of this feels very familiar.
I think we've taken it like a pretty
similar role. It's not like
>> like the whole like big tech thing of
like, you know, you're an L8, you know,
sergeant, second class, something
something. It's just like we just don't
think makes a lot of sense for us. And,
you know, people have functional titles
as like someone who's like responsible
for a given area or whatever. Uh, but
there's no kind of general notion of
title that like shows up somewhere.
>> We're the same way. And I'm we're
actually debating whether we need to
change this at some point, but basically
every single person on our engineering
team has the same title on their job
offer. It's senior engineer.
>> Yeah. For a while. Yeah. For a while, I
think for weird legal reasons, we
thought we needed like two different
ones and like for the first two years
you were a software engineer and then
afterwards you were but like with no
internal like reference or anyone paying
attention to that kind of stuff.
>> Yeah. So the the the thing which I
should probably not be saying but it's
true is is we um we we sort of treat
titles as like a as tools right like so
when we're interacting with the outside
world people can adopt any title they
wish pretty much so it's like if
somebody really needs to get into a
conference like suddenly they're a
senior staff engineer third class or
whatever like whatever our marketing
people decided would be the correct
title for you to get into that
conference and you know people you know
can use sort of whatever titles in their
by lines that they think would be most
useful or put on LinkedIn like this is
like a form of compensation like please
pick your title but internally there are
no titles
>> right and I think part of that is we
very much want a culture where the thing
that matters is the idea
>> and like what's the actual thing you're
trying to do and not like the particular
position and rank and like no culture is
perfect our culture is certainly far
from perfect and I don't think this
ideal
>> 100% works out in all the cases but I
think it's definitely like directionally
much more this way here than I think in
lots of other places and I think it's a
little disorienting actually sometimes
for like like a you know a strong
experienced person who comes from
somewhere else and lands at Jane Street.
It's like you know doesn't have like
like a rank that helps them navigate and
we have to actually be much more
intentional about like trying to get
them into the right spot and make sure
that like people quickly realize that
like oh this actually is a person who's
like substantively worth including in
and listening to in a bunch of different
contexts because we like sort of just
don't have the title tool as a way of
making that happen. And so you have to
use other methods to get people in the
right spot.
>> So how do you guys think about
maintaining that as you grow? Because I
think like this kind of organization is
really really effective and also really
hard to preserve if you grow quickly.
>> Right? So I think one of the things is
even though it feels kind of quick, we
just kind of haven't grown quickly.
We've been relatively disciplined about
growing at I don't know what feels like
a fast pace between 10 and 30%, you
know, depending on the year, usually
south of 30. Um and and when we've been
on the upper range of that, we're like,
"Wow, this is like really
uncomfortable." Like we kind of maybe
want to slow down a little bit and and
we really feel like it's important to be
able to take the time to absorb people
into the organization.
>> Um I don't I don't know how to run a
company where you need to double every
year for a few years. It seems
terrifying
>> and and it's just not how we've how
we've operated.
>> Um so that's one thing.
Uh we've also just been very rigorous
about interviewing just trying to make
sure we're bringing in people who are
very good technically like that's really
important. Um, but also who fit in
culturally, who are like nice and humble
and yep,
>> have good second order knowledge and
aren't made super uncomfortable about
being wrong because like we're all wrong
a lot. Like you make a lot of mistakes
and you want people who are comfortable
owning up to those mistakes and
>> Yeah, we design we actually deliberately
design our interview to try and assess
these qualities. Um, that's like a
significant part of why it's set up the
way it is.
>> Yep. Yeah. Know, we have similar things
from our side. It's we think it's it's
after some early mistakes based on not
understanding this, we realize that like
you really don't just want to solve the
people who are like best at solving the
puzzles. Like being good at solving
puzzles is really good, right? Being
just like having like, you know, high
wattage and just being really smart at
stuff is good. Um, but you really want
to make sure that whoever you're
interviewing, you see how they operate
under challenge. Yep. because like
you're going to take everyone and you
know there's more they can do and you're
going to keep on asking them to do more
until the job is hard and there's you
know there's no end of hard problems to
solve and so you want to see how people
operate in that context. the the thing
you mentioned of like niceness and and
being good to work with and so on that I
think we fully agree with that and that
comes from a another sort of like
fundamental observation about the world
which is most problems are hard enough
that one person alone cannot solve them
and even if they were like your
individual value that you bring just by
like the stuff that you do in almost
every case is dwarfed by the positive
and negative externalities that you
cause on the team like you know you are
going to be chatting with your friend or
your colleague at lunch and like have
some good idea that makes their job
easier or you're going to be mentoring
some junior engineer and teaching them
some trick that's going to make them
more valuable for the rest of their
career or you know on conversely you're
going to be like being really mean to
somebody and then they're in a bad mood
for the rest of the day and and aren't
as productive and also just make the
place like a less fun place to work. Um,
and so like that stuff just kind of
dominates actually when you get to a
sufficiently large organization size.
And it's not to say that you can be
ineffectual and really nice and and have
a job. Like, you know, we there you have
to get things done.
>> There is still a bar. That's right. Not
least because having people around like
that is is terrible for morale. Um,
>> right. Lowers the intellectual density.
>> That's exactly right. But but it's sort
of like you just need both and and we're
just not going to accept you unless you
are both really great on your own and
also really great and magnify the
abilities of the people around you.
>> Yep. Yeah. I think that's totally true.
One one point about the like you know
the externalities really matter. I think
that's true. I feel like you could take
that kind of thinking in the direction
of thinking that like what really
matters is like organizational stuff and
how things are put together and teams
and all that. And I think that's that
stuff is all really important. I also
feel like the shape of this business
makes very clear to us how amazingly
valuable strong individual contributors
are and like a lot of that value is like
the externalities that they have. But
like like individuals in both a kind of
trading and a technology and various
other contexts who are just like super
good at their job and like not kind of
built to be large scale leaders can
still be just like enormously valuable
and enormously well paid because that
kind of individual contribution can just
move the needle in a huge way. So like
you know it's both like this kind of
collective stuff that really matters but
also people's just individual power to
do amazing things is super important and
it's really important to like recognize
and compensate people for that kind of
stuff.
>> Yeah, I totally agree. I think you know
another thing another thing that helps
with keeping that kind of environment as
you grow is just having strong espree
and a strong like sense of yourself as
an organization. And I think you know I
think quirky cultural choices and quirky
technology choices actually help with
that. Like I think it makes people hold
their heads a little bit higher. It's
like yeah, I work at Jane Street. I work
at Antithesis. It's like a slightly
weird place. Like people who don't work
here definitely don't work here. You
know, it's not just like another
interchangeable company. And I think
that actually makes all these cultural
problems a little bit easier to solve on
every dimension.
>> Yeah, certainly. I like to think so
since I think I'm deeply culable for our
weird choice of programming language. So
I hope that has some positive
externalities. There's actually a really
interesting paper I read recently um
that that talks about this in the
context of hidic Jewish merchants in the
New York diamond district.
>> So
>> amazing.
>> Have you have you have are you familiar
with this? The researcher named Beric
Richmond.
>> I have I mean I I am familiar with like
the stores like I have seen those guys
and been in this but I have not heard
about the research.
>> So they have incredibly low transaction
costs with each other. They lend on
credit. they uh you know they they they
don't require huge amounts of
collateral. They don't sue each other.
They are very very very low transaction
cost. And that is a big part of why they
are so successful. And Richmond studies
them and basically concludes that a lot
of why they have such low transaction
costs is because they are clearly not
the world, right? They're clearly an
insular group of people who all know
each other, who all trust each other.
and you know and and and where leaving
that group or joining that group is very
expensive and and he basically thinks
that that kind of makes all of their
economic dealings more efficient and
smoother and it it's it's actually super
interesting paper.
>> Yeah, that's interesting. I do think the
high trust thing matters a lot for us. I
do think it reduces the kind of internal
transaction cost. It's kind of easier to
get things done. A thing that I'm kind
of always worried about but still
delighted seems to be still in place is
that the the place it's still a place
that can like pivot quickly. Like when
something different needs to happen, you
realize there's a new emergence and we
have to change things and move people
around and like focus less on this and
more on that. Like we're able to do it
in a way that feels generally pretty
positive. Um people who come from other
organizations are sometimes like we say,
"Oh, we're reorganizing this area."
people like there's a reorg and they you
know they stiffen up in their chair and
it's like what are you worried like
what's what's wrong about re like we
reorganize stuff all the time we change
where the seats are we move it's all
happens kind of routinely and like I
real I then I hear stories about what
reorgs are like at various big tech
firms I'm like oh now I see what you're
scared of
>> we made we've made two huge pivots in
the last two years that I'm actually
just tremendously proud of our team for
doing because they both required
>> astonishing levels of like intellectual
humility and like dealing with reality
which is a thing that organizations are
usually pretty bad at. Um the first was
basically you know we had been in
stealth mode doing R&D like deep
research for 5 years and then we came
out and started selling it and at some
point we kind of realized that we were
still thinking of the world in a very
R&D way and then in particular we just
were not listening to our customers and
did not have the like customer service
mindset at all and were really really
bad at listening to their feedback and
were really really bad at like doing
what our customers wanted and that maybe
this is like not a great property for a
company trying to have more customers to
have.
>> That makes sense. And so like this like
kind of like sense dawned on us and
eventually we were just like oh we have
to change how we think about everything
and how we do everything and you know
the company just like all pulled
together and we're like okay we're going
to be different now and and we did and
we like turned on a dime and I think it
went really well and it's like not 100%
done but it's like notably and
distinctly different. Um, and the second
one was AI where basically for like most
of the last few years we were kind of
like AI coding is dumb. It like doesn't
work. It's like not not like mostly a
waste of time. Like you shouldn't do
that. And then like you know Opus 4.5
came out and everybody played with it at
home and we were like ah crap this
actually works now. And and it was just
like again this like like a lot of
places I think would have trouble
admitting that they had been that wrong
about something that important. And
instead the technical leaders at our
company who I respect tremendously not
least for this were sort of like okay we
were wrong like let's let's let's deal
with the world now time time to change
you know and like and like very quickly
everything got reoriented and
recalibrated and like I just I think
that's what it looks like for an
organization to be able to like adapt to
a changing environment. I do by the way
think that was like in some sense the
right pivot point. I kind of feel like
we've actually been spending an an
enormous amount of energy building tools
and trying to get agentic coding working
effectively for a few years now. Um, and
I think up until now it's kind of been
bad. Like there are a bunch of things
for which it's great. There are defin
but but like for the majority of work
you're doing doing like critical
software. I think it's more has been
more likely to slow you down than speed
you up. And it it sort of they had this
feeling of like
>> you know spending a bunch of time
building a boat and having a sail there
and like holding the sail up and like
there's no wind coming. Um and you know
we get some utility out of it. People
use it for some things, the tools get
better, but like with a recent round of
models both from from like all the
vendors actually at this point, like
there are the models are much better.
Yeah.
>> Uh and suddenly it feels like there's
wind in the sales and now it feels like
we're pretty well prepared
>> and have you know a good team in place
and are like, you know, being able to
deliver a lot of value based on this
stuff. But there was an awkward period
of like
>> I mean these things are miraculous but
also not super useful. Um and now they
seem both miraculous and useful.
>> Yep. Yep. Yep. Yeah. So I don't know it
is I think I think also like on all of
this cultural stuff one of the most
important things is just having senior
people modeling good behavior like we
all take great pains the senior people
at the company take great pains to like
give credit to others right to like to
to to loudly proclaim when they were
wrong or did something dumb just like
showing that that is what we do.
Everybody is always looking at the
implicit like we all have the same
title, but you're look you're looking at
the implicit leaders and seeing how they
act and so having them act the way that
you want everybody to act is like kind
of step one.
>> Yeah. And I I I just want to say like
don't give it up. Like it is possible to
maintain at larger scale. I you know I I
don't want to say we've done all of this
perfectly but it echoes a lot with the
kind of things that you're talking
about. I think we really have been able
to keep up with it. Um by the one other
thing that has been I think important is
the place is designed for long tenurs.
like we just have people who have been
around here for a long time. Like the
turnover rate is pretty low and I think
that affects a lot of things about the
culture. It keeps a lot of institutional
knowledge around and it helps maintain
the culture. I think one of the things
about cultures is they're kind of
mysterious. You don't actually know
which parts of it are the ones that are
loadbearing and so you want to be very
careful about preserving it in a
somewhat conservative way. There's a lot
of like Chesterton's tent fence kind of
thinking going along.
>> You know, that's why we're in DC.
Everybody always asks me, why on earth
did you put a ambitious deep tech
company in DC and not the Bay Area? And
it's basically 100% so that we can
actually keep people and invest in them
for the long term. It's not just the Bay
Area has tons and tons of competition.
It's actually just that the Bay Area has
a meta culture of job hopping every 9
months to get slightly more RSUs. And
basically once every company is in that
equilibrium, nobody invests in anybody.
and it's like very hard to to be the one
that stands out and doesn't act that
way. Whereas in DC, you know, people are
used to working for the government and
working there for like 30 years. And so
the like kind of ambient expectation in
the water is like, yeah, you're going to
go work somewhere and work there for 30
years. And so we have ridiculously good
tenure among our engineers and are able
to invest in them. And it's just like a
way nicer in my opinion.
>> That's okay. That's amazing. Okay, that
seems like a great note to end on. Thank
you so much. This has been really fun.
>> This was awesome. Thank you so much for
having me.
>> You'll find a complete transcript of the
episode along with show notes and links
at signalsandthreads.com.